>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JUNE 18:
MISSING AMERICAN SAILORS ARE
CONFIRMED DEAD AFTER YESTERDAY'S
COLLISION WITH A CONTAINER SHIP.
LOOKING CLOSER AT PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S LATEST FINANCIAL
DISCLOSURES.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
TRYING TO SOLVE THE HOMELESS
CRISIS IN HAWAII.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE SEARCH FOR SEVEN MISSING
SAILORS FROM AN AMERICAN WARSHIP
THAT COLLIDED WITH A CONTAINER
SHIP OFF JAPAN HAS ENDED
TRAGICALLY.
THE COMMANDER OF THE NAVY'S 7th
FLEET SAID TODAY DIVERS FOUND A
NUMBER OF SAILORS' BODIES INSIDE
THE FLOODED, DAMAGED SECTIONS
AND SLEEPING QUARTERS ON THE USS
FITZGERALD.
THE PUBLICATION "NAVY TIMES"
LATER CONFIRMED ALL SEVEN BODIES
WERE RECOVERED ABOARD THE GUIDED
MISSILE DESTROYER.
A NAVY SPOKESMAN SAID THE
SAILORS EITHER DROWNED OR WERE
KILLED BY THE IMPACT OF THE PRE-
DAWN COLLISION YESTERDAY WITH A
FILIPINO-FLAGGED CONTAINER SHIP
FOUR TIMES ITS SIZE.
THE COLLISION -- MORE THAN 60
NAUTICAL MILES FROM ITS BASE AT
YOKOSUKA PUNCTURED THE
FITZGERALD BELOW THE WATER LINE.
THE FLEET COMMANDER SAID
DESPERATE EFFORTS BY THE CREW
SAVED THE SHIP FROM SINKING, BUT
WOULD NOT SPECULATE ON THE CAUSE
OF THE ACCIDENT.
DOCTORS AT MEDSTAR WASHINGTON
HOSPITAL CENTER SAY THE
CONDITION OF WOUNDED HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES MAJORITY WHIP
STEVE SCALISE HAS BEEN UPGRADED
FROM "CRITICAL" TO "SERIOUS."
THEY SAY THE LOUISIANA
CONGRESSMAN HAS BEEN MORE
RESPONSIVE AND TALKED WITH
FAMILY MEMBERS AFTER UNDERGOING
ANOTHER SURGERY YESTERDAY.
SCALISE WAS SHOT IN THE HIP WHEN
A GUNMAN ARMED WITH A HIGH-
POWERED, SEMI-AUTOMATIC RIFLE
OPENED FIRE ON THE REPUBLICAN
BASEBALL TEAM'S PRACTICE IN
ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA, LAST
WEDNESDAY.
WHILE SPENDING FATHER'S DAY WITH
HIS FAMILY ON HIS FIRST TRIP TO
CAMP DAVID, PRESIDENT TRUMP TOOK
TO TWITTER TO TOUT HIS APPROVAL
RATINGS AND CRITICIZE THE
SPECIAL COUNSEL INVESTIGATION OF
HIS ADMINISTRATION AND CAMPAIGN.
MISTER TRUMP SAID:
THE NEW RASMUSSEN POLL, ONE OF
THE MOST ACCURATE IN THE 2016
ELECTION, JUST OUT WITH A TRUMP
50% APPROVAL RATING.
THAT'S HIGHER THAN "O"s
NUMBERS!" REFERRING, IT SEEMS,
TO PRESIDENT OBAMA.
HOWEVER, MR. OBAMA'S APPROVAL
RATING IN THE SAME RASMUSSEN
DAILY TRACKING POLL ACTUALLY
STOOD AT 56% AT THIS TIME DURING
HIS PRESIDENCY.
THE LATEST NATIONAL GALLUP POLL
PLACES MR. TRUMP'S APPROVAL
RATING MUCH LOWER THAN RASMUSSEN
AT 39%.
MR. TRUMP AGAIN CALLED THE PROBE
BY SPECIAL COUNSEL ROBERT
MUELLER A "WITCH HUNT," WHILE
ONE OF HIS PERSONAL ATTORNEYS
CONTRADICTED A TRUMP TWEET FROM
LAST WEEK WHERE THE PRESIDENT
CONCEDED HE WAS UNDER CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATION.
>> I WANT TO BE REALLY CLEAR
ABOUT THIS-- THE PRESIDENT IS
NOT AND HAS NOT BEEN UNDER
INVESTIGATION.
>> HOW DO YOU KNOW?
>> BECAUSE WE'VE RECEIVED NO
NOTICE OF INVESTIGATION.
THERE HAS BEEN NO NOTIFICATION
FROM THE SPECIAL COUNSEL'S
OFFICE THAT THE PRESIDENT IS
UNDER INVESTIGATION.
>> Sreenivasan: A MEMBER OF THE
SENATE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE,
WHICH IS CONDUCTING ITS OWN
INVESTIGATION, SAID TODAY THESE
SEMANTICS ARE IRRELEVANT.
>> I MEAN, WE DON'T NEED TO
DECIDE OR ARGUE ABOUT IT TODAY,
WHETHER OR NOT THE PRESIDENT IS
UNDER INVESTIGATION.
MUELLER WILL INVESTIGATE WHAT HE
THINKS IS IMPORTANT, AND WE'LL
FIND OUT IN A MATTER OF TIME
WHETHER HE'S FOLLOWING UP ON THE
QUESTION OF OBSTRUCTION OF
JUSTICE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HOUSE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE HAS GIVEN
THE WHITE HOUSE A FRIDAY
DEADLINE TO OFFICIALLY CONFIRM
OR DENY WHETHER ANY RECORDINGS
EXIST OF THE PRESIDENT'S OVAL
OFFICE OR PHONE CONVERSATIONS
WITH FIRED F.B.I. DIRECTOR JAMES
COMEY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE VOLUNTARY
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE FORM
RELEASED FRIDAY SHOWS THE TRUMP
ORGANIZATION AND MISTER TRUMP
HIMSELF EARNED $529 MILLION IN
TOTAL REVENUE AND INCOME FROM
EARLY 2016 THROUGH HIS FIRST
THREE MONTHS AS PRESIDENT.
AMONG THE HIGHLIGHTS, THE
PRESIDENT SAYS HIS ASSETS ARE
WORTH AT LEAST $1.4 BILLION AND
THAT HE'S RETAINED OWNERSHIP OF
MOST OF THEM.
THE PRESIDENT'S FLORIDA GOLF
CLUB, MAR-A-LAGO, MADE $37.2
MILLION FROM JANUARY 2016
THROUGH THIS SPRING, UP FROM
$29.8 MILLION THE YEAR BEFORE.
KEEP IN MIND, FOLLOWING MR.
TRUMP'S ELECTION, MAR-A-LAGO
DOUBLED ITS INITIATION FEE TO
$200,000.
THE TRUMP ORGANIZATION EARNED 20
MILLION DOLLARS IN INCOME
RELATED TO ITS WASHINGTON, D.C.
HOTEL THAT OPENED LAST OCTOBER.
OVERSEAS, FOR THE FIRST TIME,
TRUMP REPORTED $100,000 INCOME
FROM THE TRUMP TOWER IN KOLKATA,
INDIA.
HE ALSO REPORTED $5 MILLION FROM
HIS NEW HOTEL-AND-CONDOMINIUM
TOWER IN VANCOUVER, CANADA.
FOR MORE ANALYSIS OF THESE
FINANCIAL REVELATIONS, I AM
JOINED BY "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER AMY BRITTAIN.
SO WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM
THIS?
>> I THINK THE BIG TAKEAWAY IN
LOOKING AT THE FORM IS THAT THIS
IS LIKE TRULY AN UNPRECEDENTED
SITUATION WITH THE PRESIDENT,
CHOOSING TO HOLD ON TO THIS VAST
WEALTH, EVEN AS HE'S ENTERED
THE OFFICE OF THE WHITE HOUSE.
SO IF YOU LOOK AT HIS FORM, THE
MAIN CHANGE IS THAT HE HAS
MOVED THE MAJORITY OF HIS
BUSINESS INTO A TRUST, WHICH IS
CONTROLLED BY HIS SONS, DON JR.
AND ERIC.
THAT TRUST HAS COME UNDER
CRITICISM IN RECENT MONTHS
BECAUSE IT'S BEEN REVEALED THAT
PRESIDENT TRUMP HAS ACCESS TO
THAT TRUST AT ANY TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE
DISCLOSURE FORM, ARE WE SEEING
CHANGES FROM WHAT WAS FILED
BEFORE?
>> WELL, IMMEDIATELY CRITICS
ARE LOOKING AT THE FORMS TO SEE
IS HE PROFITING OFF THE OFFICE
OF THE PRESIDENCY?
YOU CAN LOOK AT THE PROFITS FROM
MAR-A-LAGO, FROM HIS DIFFERENT
HOTELS AROUND THE WORLD AND YOU
CAN SEE AN INCREASE IN THE
REVENUE THAT'S BROUGHT IN MAR-A-
LAGO.
I THINK THE MOST TELLING IS THE
ONE HE FILED IN 2015, WHICH WAS
THE BEGINNING OF HIS CANDIDACY.
AND IN THAT FORM HE REPORTED
ABOUT $15 MILLION IN REVENUE
FROM MAR-A-LAGO FROM THE
PRECEDING PERIOD AND NOW MORE
THAN $37 MILLION.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE WAS
REPORTING A LITTLE EARLIER THIS
WEEK ABOUT THE TYPE OF
INFLUENCE THAT MAY OR MAY NOT
EXIST, THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
BUYING HIS CONDOMINIUMS, HAVE
BEEN BUYING THEM THROUGH LLCs,
AND IT'S DIFFICULT FOR ANYONE TO
SEE WHO'S PURCHASING THAT,
WHETHER THAT'S AN INDIVIDUAL OR
A FOREIGN GOVERNMENT.
>> DEFINITELY.
IT'S EXCEEDINGLY DIFFICULT TO
TRACK THE UNDERLYING BUYERS
OF PROPERTIES PURCHASED THROUGH
LLCs.
THAT IS THE LIMITATIONS OF
THIS FORM.
THAT IS NOT THE SAME AS LOOKING
AT A TAX RELEASE.
>> Sreenivasan: WE ALSO HAVE
DEMOCRATS, DEMOCRATIC ATTORNEY
GENERALS IN MARYLAND, TWO
HUNDRED DEMOCRATIC MEMBERS AND
THE CITIZENS FOR RESPONSIBILITY
IN ETHICS IN WASHINGTON ARE ALL
SUING TRUMP BECAUSE THEY THINK
THERE IS A VIOLATION OF THE
EMOLUMENTS CLAUSE, SAYING HIS
BUSINESSES AND HOW HE OWNS THEM
STILL VIOLATES THE CONSTITUTION.
>> THE HOTEL IN D.C. HAS
BECOME THE CENTER OF THIS
CONTROVERSY.
THAT HOTEL HAS BROUGHT IN ABOUT
$20 MILLION SINCE ITS OPENING
IN OCTOBER.
WHAT THE ATTORNEY GENERALS
LAWSUIT LAST WEEK, THEY WERE
ALLEGING LOOK, THEY ARE CALLING
THIS AN UNPRECEDENTED
CONSTITUTIONAL VIOLATION IN
THE SCOPE OF IT.
THEY ARE SAYING THERE IS NO
MEANINGFUL DIVIDE BETWEEN HIS
BUSINESS EMPIRE AND THE OFFICE
OF THE PRESIDENCY.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE
SOMETHING THAT THE WHITE HOUSE
HAS SAID AFTER THIS RELEASE OF
INFORMATION?
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT'S GOING
TO HAPPEN EVERY QUARTER.
HAVE THEY MADE COMMENTS ON HOW
TO CHARACTERIZE THE INFORMATION
THAT THE OFFICE OF GOVERNMENT
ETHICS JUST RELEASED?
>> I THINK THEY ARE QUICK TO
SAY, LOOK, THIS IS VOLUNTARY.
HE MADE AN EFFORT TO PUT THIS
OUT IN THE FIRST YEAR OF HIS
PRESIDENCY.
THEY ARE SAYING THAT THIS IS AN
EFFORT THAT HE DID NOT
NECESSARILY HAVE TO DO THIS
YEAR, HE COULD HAVE WAITED UNTIL
THE NEXT YEAR IF HE WANTED TO TO
RELEASE HIS FINANCIAL STATEMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: AMY BRITTAIN OF
THE WASHINGTON POST, THANK YOU
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: DURING THE PAST
DECADE, HAWAII HAS ENDURED A
38% INCREASE IN ITS HOMELESS
POPULATION, THAT'S THE HIGHEST
GROWTH RATE OF ANY STATE.
BEYOND THE PROBLEMS OF ACCESS
TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING--
HAWAII'S HOMELESSNESS PROBLEM
SEVERELY STRESSES THE STATE'S
PUBLIC HEALTH CARE SYSTEM, WITH
SO MANY HOMELESS SUFFERING FROM
UNTREATED DISEASES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND CORRESPONDENT
MEGAN THOMPSON REPORTS ON
HAWAII'S EFFORTS TO REVERSE
THESE TRENDS.
>> MORNING GUYS, ANYBODY NEED
MEDICAL ATTENTION?
>> Reporter: ON A MONDAY
MORNING, JUSTIN PHILLIPS SETS
OUT WITH A SMALL MEDICAL TEAM TO
OFFER AID TO HAWAII'S HOMELESS.
>> WHAT'S UP?
YOU CAN ALWAYS CALL ME.
I'LL TRY TO HELP IF I CAN.
>> Reporter: PHILLIPS DIRECTS
OUTREACH FOR THE INSTITUTE FOR
HUMAN SERVICES, THE STATE'S
LARGEST HOMELESS SERVICES
PROVIDER.
HIS FIRST STOP-- A SIDEWALK
ENCAMPMENT STRETCHING TWO BLOCKS
NEAR DOWNTOWN HONOLULU.
PHILLIPS KNOWS WHAT IT'S LIKE TO
SLEEP ON THESE STREETS.
ABOUT A DECADE AGO, HE STRUGGLED
WITH ADDICTION AND WAS HOMELESS
TOO.
>> I COME OUT HERE WITH AN
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE HOMELESS.
I COME OUT HERE WITH AN
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE A DRUG ADDICT.
I COME OUT HERE WITH AN
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE AN ALCOHOLIC.
AND BECAUSE I HAVE THAT
UNDERSTANDING, I'M ABLE TO
RELATE TO PEOPLE IN A DIFFERENT
WAY.
>> LOOKING FOR AMY.
>> Reporter: AT A PARK DOWNTOWN,
PHILLIPS AND HIS TEAM FIND A
WOMAN THEY KNOW WELL.
>> HEY AMY!
>> HOW MUCH YOU HAD TO DRINK
TODAY?
>> Reporter: THERE ARE AROUND
7,200 HOMELESS IN THIS STATE OF
1.4 MILLION PEOPLE.
>> HAWAII IS KNOWN AS A
BEAUTIFUL ISLAND PARADISE.
BUT IT ALSO HAS THE DISTINCTION
OF HAVING ONE OF THE HIGHEST
PER-CAPITA RATE OF HOMELESSNESS
IN THE NATION.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
MOST RECENT STATISTICS, HAWAII'S
HOMELESSNESS RATE IS NOW AROUND
505 HOMELESS FOR EVERY 100,000
RESIDENTS.
BY COMPARISON, NEW YORK STATE
HAD 436 PER 100,000, AND
CALIFORNIA, 302.
HAWAII'S PROBLEM BECAME SO
SEVERE, THAT TWO YEARS AGO
GOVERNOR DAVID IGE DECLARED A
STATE OF EMERGENCY.
>> THIS HOMELESSNESS CHALLENGE
IS A CRISIS.
>> Reporter: THAT RELEASED MORE
FUNDING FOR NEW HOUSING AND
SHELTERS LIKE THIS ONE--
DESIGNED SPECIFICALLY FOR
FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN.
>> WE HAVE A VERY TIGHT HOUSING
MARKET HERE.
>> Reporter: STATE HOMELESSNESS
COORDINATOR SCOTT MORISHIGE SAYS
HAWAII'S HIGH COST OF HOUSING IS
THE NUMBER ONE CAUSE OF THE
PROBLEM.
AVERAGE RENT FOR A ONE-BEDROOM
APARTMENT HERE IS ALMOST $1,800
A MONTH.
AND HAWAII RANKS NUMBER ONE OF
THE 50 STATES IN HIGHEST OVERALL
COST OF LIVING.
>> WE REALLY HAVE A SHORTAGE OF
AFFORDABLE HOUSING, AND
PARTICULARLY RENTAL HOUSING.
PART OF IT IS BECAUSE WE'RE AN
ISLAND STATE, SO WE HAVE VERY
LIMITED LAND.
AND THERE'S NOT AS MUCH
OPPORTUNITY FOR ADDITIONAL
DEVELOPMENT.
>> Reporter: TWO-THIRDS OF
HAWAII'S HOMELESS LIVE ON THE
ISLAND OF OAHU, THE MOST
POPULOUS OF THE STATE'S EIGHT
ISLANDS AND HOME TO THE CAPITAL,
HONOLULU.
NATIVE HAWAIIANS AND PACIFIC
ISLANDERS WHO'VE MIGRATED FROM
PLACES LIKE THE MARSHALL ISLANDS
AND MICRONESIA MAKE UP A QUARTER
OF HAWAII'S POPULATION, BUT
ACCOUNT FOR 40% OF THE HOMELESS.
>> HI CHARLES!
CAN I TAKE A PEEK AT YOUR LEGS?
>> Reporter: THE MEDICAL
OUTREACH TEAM INCLUDES HEATHER
WAHAB, A REGISTERED NURSE.
SKIN WOUNDS FROM LIVING OUTDOORS
ARE A COMMON PROBLEM.
>> THEY HURT?
>> Reporter: THESE HOMELESS
INDIVIDUALS REPRESENT SOME OF
THE MOST DIFFICULT, CHRONIC
CASES.
MOST ALL OF THEM HAVE UNTREATED
PHYSICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH
ISSUES.
>> ROSIE!
>> Reporter: PSYCHIATRIST CHAD
KOYANAGI ASSESSES MENTAL ILLNESS
AND ADDICTIONS.
>> YOU HAVE DEPRESSION, BIPOLAR,
PSYCHOSIS?
>> YES.
DEPRESSION AND BIPOLAR.
>> ARE YOU DEPRESSED NOW?
>> YES I AM.
>> ARE YOU HEARING VOICES?
>> I'M HURTING BAD.
I HAVE NOTHING TO HELP ME.
>> Reporter: HOMELESS SERVICE
PROVIDER JUSTIN PHILLIPS SAYS IN
ORDER FOR A HOMELESS PERSON TO
QUALIFY FOR CERTAIN HOUSING
PROGRAMS, A DOCTOR MUST DIAGNOSE
A DISABILITY.
BUT PHILLIPS SAYS MANY OF THE
PEOPLE OUT HERE CAN'T BE RELIED
ON TO MAKE IT TO AN APPOINTMENT.
>> WE KNOW THEY'RE NOT GONNA GO
TO A DOCTOR, YOU KNOW?
"MY MAIN PRIORITY IS GETTING A
BEER IN MY SYSTEM, MAYBE SOME,
YOU KNOW, MARIJUANA, MAYBE SOME
ICE.
WANNA GET LOADED, GET GOOD AND--
YOU KNOW, GOOD AND HIGH.
AND THEN I'M READY TO GO DO IT."
BUT BY THAT TIME, IT'S 5 P.M.,
ALL THE DOCTORS ARE CLOSED, ALL
THE DOCTORS' OFFICES ARE CLOSED,
THERE'S NO PSYCHIATRISTS.
>> Reporter: WHEN HONOLULU'S
HOMELESS DO SEEK OUT CARE, IT'S
USUALLY AT THE QUEEN'S MEDICAL
CENTER, A PRIVATE NONPROFIT
HOSPITAL THAT HANDLES MORE THAN
10,000 VISITS A YEAR.
DANIEL CHENG IS THE E.R. MEDICAL
DIRECTOR.
>> THE TOP FEW DIAGNOSES THAT WE
SEE ARE INFECTIOUS DISEASE,
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH, AND SUBSTANCE
ABUSE.
>> Reporter: MANY OF CHENG'S
HOMELESS PATIENTS ALSO SUFFER
FROM HEART DISEASE, DIABETES,
AND KIDNEY DISEASE, AND LACK
ACCESS TO REGULAR MEDICAL CARE.
>> OUR HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS DIE
ABOUT ONE-THIRD EARLIER THAN THE
NORMAL POPULATION.
SO WE'RE TALKING A GOOD SOLID 20
TO 25 YEARS LOST OF LIFE.
AND THAT REALLY STRIKES HOME.
BECAUSE I THINK THAT SPEAKS TO
THE FRUSTRATION AS A PHYSICIAN.
AT THE VERY CORE OF WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO IS QUALITY OF LIFE.
>> Reporter: THE HOMELESS BURDEN
CHENG'S HOSPITAL WITH AROUND
$10 MILLION A YEAR IN
UNREIMBURSED MEDICAL BILLS.
THEY ALSO BURDEN MEDICAID, THE
GOVERNMENT HEALTH INSURANCE
SYSTEM FOR THE POOR.
ABOUT 50% OF MEDICAID FUNDS ARE
SPENT ON SO-CALLED HIGH-
UTILIZERS, PEOPLE LIKE THE
HOMELESS WHO FREQUENTLY VISIT
THE E.R.
>> Reporter: CHENG SAYS HE SEES
THE SAME HOMELESS PATIENTS OVER
AND OVER.
>> WE JUST DON'T HAVE ENOUGH
TIME AND RESOURCES TO ADDRESS
THE SOCIAL ISSUES.
AND THEY GO BACK OUT TO THE
STREET AND THEY GET LOST INTO
THE SYSTEM.
AND IT'S A VERY PERVERSE AND
IT'S A VERY BROKEN SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: TO CHANGE THAT,
CHENG HAS STARTED A PROGRAM TO
PUT SOCIAL WORKERS IN THE E.R.
TO CONNECT THE HOMELESS TO FOOD
STAMPS, HOUSING AND OTHER
SERVICES, BEFORE THEY'RE
DISCHARGED AND HARD TO LOCATE
AGAIN.
THE HOSPITAL IS ALSO PARTNERING
WITH JUSTIN PHILLIPS' INSTITUTE
FOR HUMAN SERVICES TO OPEN HOMES
LIKE THIS ONE, WHERE THE
SERIOUSLY ILL HOMELESS CAN HEAL
WITHOUT TAKING UP A MORE
EXPENSIVE HOSPITAL BED.
>> WE ARE SPENDING $3 TRILLION A
YEAR ON HEALTH CARE.
>> Reporter: ADDRESSING
HOMELESSNESS IS A TOP PRIORITY
FOR HAWAII STATE SENATOR JOSH
GREEN.
GREEN IS ALSO A PRACTICING ER
DOCTOR AND IS PUSHING A MORE
RADICAL IDEA.
HE INTRODUCED A BILL SAYING
HOMELESSNESS SHOULD BE
CONSIDERED A MEDICAL CONDITION,
AND DOCTORS SHOULD BE ABLE TO
PRESCRIBE HOUSING.
>> THE MOMENT YOU HAVE SOMEONE
IN HOUSING, YOU DECREASE ALL OF
THE COMPLICATIONS THEY HAVE FROM
ALL THEIR OTHER DISEASES.
>> Reporter: GREEN SAYS MEDICAID
SHOULD COVER RENT FOR THE
HOMELESS.
HE CITES A UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII
STUDY SHOWING THAT AFTER THE
HOMELESS WERE GIVEN HOUSING,
THEIR MEDICAL COSTS DECREASED BY
43%.
>> WE'RE ALREADY SPENDING THESE
MEDICAID RESOURCES ON OUR
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE REALLY
HURTING.
AND WE'RE SPENDING IT VERY
INEFFICIENTLY.
IF THEY GET ADMITTED TO THE
HOSPITAL FOR A DAY, IT'S $4,000.
IF THEY GO 100 TIMES IN THE
YEAR, WHICH IS VERY COMMON
ACROSS HAWAII AND ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, THEY MAY SPEND $200,000
OR $300,000 OF TAXPAYER MONEY.
>> Reporter: GREEN'S PROPOSAL
HAS GAINED NATIONAL MEDIA
ATTENTION.
BUT IT HASN'T PASSED THE HAWAII
STATE LEGISLATURE.
IN THE MEANTIME HE'S WORKING
WITH LOCAL HEALTH INSURERS TO
PILOT THE IDEA.
>> HAWAII'S NOT NECESSARILY
WAITING FOR LEGISLATION TO GO
THROUGH.
>> Reporter: STATE HOMELESSNESS
COORDINATOR SCOTT MORISHIGE SAYS
EVEN WITHOUT GREEN'S BILL, THE
STATE WILL SEEK PERMISSION FROM
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO SPEND
MEDICAID DOLLARS ON HELPING
PEOPLE FIND AND STAY IN HOUSING.
SIMILAR IDEAS HAVE BEEN LOOKED
AT IN NEW YORK AND CALIFORNIA.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE STATE AND
CITY HAVE BEEN INVESTING IN A
PROGRAM CALLED HOUSING FIRST,
WHICH PROPONENTS SAY HAS STARTED
TO MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE.
THE IDEA, WHICH HAS HAD SUCCESS
IN OTHER STATES, IS TO GET A
HOMELESS PERSON INTO HOUSING
BEFORE DOING ANYTHING ELSE.
>> BECAUSE WE KNOW THE QUICKER
YOU CAN GET SOMEONE INTO HOUSING
AND A POINT OF STABILITY, THE
MORE POSITIVE IMPACT YOU WILL
HAVE FOR THAT PERSON.
>> Reporter: AND THAT INCLUDES
POSITIVE IMPACTS ON A PERSON'S
HEALTH.
>> COME ON IN.
>> Reporter: HOUSING FIRST IS
HOW THOMAS LAMBERTON, HOMELESS
FOR EIGHT YEARS, GOT INTO HIS
APARTMENT ABOUT TWO YEARS AGO.
>> THIS IS THE PICTURE OF
CARDBOARD THAT I SLEPT ON AND MY
BACKPACK I USED FOR A PILLOW.
>> Reporter: AS AN ALCOHOLIC
LIVING ON THE STREETS OF
HONOLULU, LAMBERTON HAD REGULAR
SEIZURES.
DID YOU GO TO THE EMERGENCY ROOM
WHEN YOU WERE ON THE STREETS?
>> EVERY OTHER WEEK AT LEAST.
WELL, IT WAS CONSTANT.
IT'S EMBARRASSING WHEN NURSES
KNOW YOUR FIRST NAME.'
HEY THOMAS.'
IT'S LIKE, ' WHOA.'
THIS IS MY BEDROOM, AND MY
BATHROOM, WITH A SHOWER.
>> Reporter: THEN, A LOCAL
NONPROFIT GOT LAMBERTON ON A
LIST FOR A HOUSING FIRST
APARTMENT.
>> I MEAN, I'M NOT DRINKING.
THAT'S FIRST OF ALL.
AND YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU'RE NOT
DRINKING, YOU'RE GONNA BE
HEALTHIER.
AND I HAVE A PLACE TO PUT FOOD
IN THE REFRIGERATOR.
>> Reporter: SINCE HE MOVED IN,
LAMBERTON HAS ALSO STOPPED
HAVING SEIZURES.
HE'S ON MEDICAID AND SEES A
PRIMARY CARE DOCTOR.
AND HE'S BEEN TO THE EMERGENCY
ROOM ONLY TWICE, FOR MINOR
INJURIES HE GOT VOLUNTEERING AT
THE HUMANE SOCIETY.
>> MY HEALTH IS GREAT NOW,
BECAUSE I DON'T HAVE THE
RASPBERRY PATCHES ON MY HIPS AND
SHOULDERS FROM SLEEPING ON
CONCRETE OR CARDBOARD.
>> Reporter: BUT LAMBERTON SAYS
HIS NEW HOME HAS RESTORED MORE
THAN JUST HIS HEALTH.
>> IT GAVE ME MY SELF-RESPECT
BACK THAT I-- DON'T FEEL LIKE A
PIECE OF SCUM ON THE STREET AND-
- WORTHLESS TO SOCIETY.
BASICALLY THEY'VE HELPED ME OUT
IMMENSELY.
AND I OWE THEM MY LIFE.
>> Reporter: OVER THE LAST TWO
YEARS, THE STATE AND HONOLULU
HAVE EXPANDED HOUSING FIRST BY
ADDING 400 NEW HOUSING UNITS -
LIKE THIS NEW BUILDING, OPENED
LAST MONTH.
MORE THAN 500 HUNDRED PEOPLE
WILL BE HOUSED BY THE END OF
THIS YEAR.
ADVOCATES SAY HOUSING FIRST HAS
HELPED FINALLY TURN THE TIDE.
>> OUR HOMELESS NUMBERS HAVE
DECREASED STATEWIDE.
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH, HAWAII
ANNOUNCED THE FIRST DECREASE IN
ITS HOMELESS POPULATION IN EIGHT
YEARS.
DOWN 9% BETWEEN 2016 AND 2017.
THEY'RE HOPING IMPROVEMENTS IN
HEALTH AND MEDICAL SPENDING WILL
NOW FOLLOW.
>> YOU OK?
>> Reporter: BACK ON THE
STREETS, JUSTIN PHILLIPS SAYS
HOUSING PEOPLE IS THE ULTIMATE
GOAL HERE, TOO.
>> YOU EVER THOUGHT ABOUT COMING
DOWN TO THE SHELTER AND HOOKING
UP WITH A SOCIAL WORKER?
>> Reporter: GAINING TRUST TO
GET PEOPLE HEALTHY.
AND INTO A HOME.
>> WE'VE HOUSED A LOT OF PEOPLE
THAT NORMALLY WOULDN'T GET SEEN
BY DOCTORS, WOULD NEVER GET
HOUSING.
WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO HOUSE THEM
THROUGH THIS PROCESS.'
HOPE, ONE BANDAGE AT A TIME,'
YOU KNOW, BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT--
REALLY, WHAT WE'RE DOING, YOU
KNOW?
ONE RELATIONSHIP THROUGH ONE
BANDAGE, YOU KNOW.
>> CHECK OUT THE SEVEN BEST
BOOKS FROM INDEPENDENT
PUBLISHERS, ONLINE AT
PBS.ORG/NewsHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE THE 1980s,
MILLIONS OF AMERICAN WOMEN HAVE
USED FERTILITY TREATMENTS;
INCLUDING THE IMPLANTATION OF
EMBRYOS, TO BECOME PREGNANT.
BUT THE PROCESS IS EXPENSIVE,
AVERAGING $12,000.
EARLIER THIS MONTH, "REVEAL"--
PART OF THE CENTER FOR
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING-- TOOK
AN IN-DEPTH LOOK AT WHY THE
SUCCESS RATE MIGHT NOT BE THE
BEST WAY OF MEASURING A CLINIC
AND HOW THE GROWTH IN I.V.F.
TREATMENT HAS HELPED DRIVE UP
AMERICA'S TWIN BIRTH RATE BY 75%
SINCE 1980.
FOR MORE ON THIS STORY, I
RECENTLY SPOKE TO "REVEAL"
REPORTER BERNICE YEUNG.
FIRST OF ALL, YOU PICK OUT A
VERY, VERY TRAGIC CASE AND YOU
FOLLOW THAT THROUGH.
BUT IT STARTS TO HIGHLIGHT A
MUCH BIGGER PICTURE THAT
TRANSCENDS THE CASE IN POINT,
THAT THERE REALLY ISN'T A GREAT
WAY FOR A CONSUMER TO JUDGE
WHERE TO GO TO GET THIS
TREATMENT.
>> MY REPORTING PARTNER AND I
SPENT A YEAR LOOKING AT THE
FERTILITY FIELD AND WHAT STRUCK
US THERE WAS THAT THERE'S A
PATCHWORK OF REGULATIONS THAT
OVERSEE THE FERTILITY BUSINESS.
IT'S BASICALLY REGULATED LIKE
OTHER FIELDS OF MEDICINE, WHICH
MEANS IT'S PRETTY HANDS-OFF BUT
AT THE SAME TIME, GIVEN THE
ETHICAL AND INNOVATION
COMPONENTS TO I.V.F. AND
OTHER FERTILITY TREATMENTS, WE
JUST FOUND THERE WASN'T A LOT OF
INFORMATION PROVIDED TO
CONSUMERS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO GIVE ME AN
EXAMPLE HERE.
IF I WENT TO A WEBSITE TO TRY TO
COMPARE WHETHER OR NOT THIS IS
A GOOD DOCTOR OR THIS IS A GOOD
CLINIC, WHAT DO I HAVE ACCESS
TO AND WHAT AM I JUDGING THEM
BASED ON?
>> THE ONLY LEGISLATION AND
REGULATION OUT THERE THAT
EXPLICITLY DEALS WITH THE
FERTILITY FIELD IS A LAW THAT
REQUIRES CENTERS FOR DISEASE
CONTROL TO COLLECT SUCCESS
RATES FOR I.V.F. CLINICS.
WHAT WE FOUND IN OUR
INVESTIGATION WAS THAT THESE
SUCCESS RATES CAN BE MANIPULATED
AND EASILY MISUNDERSTOOD BY
PATIENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU HAVE A
CHART THAT LOOKS AT HOW OFTEN
U.S. I.V.F. CLINICS TRANSFERS
MORE THAN ONE EMBRYO.
AND IT IS STARTLING.
CONSIDERING THE C.D.C. SAYS
AND SUGGESTS THAT YOU SHOULD DO
ONE AT A TIME, THE NUMBER OF
CLINICS WHO ACTUALLY JUST NEVER
DO MORE THAN ONE AT A TIME
IS THE MINORITY BY A LONG SHOT.
>> I THINK 63 CLINICS IN THE
UNITED STATES DO ZERO SINGLE-
EMBRYO TRANSFERS IN WOMEN WHO
ARE THE YOUNGEST GROUP.
THIS IS A CONVERSATION YOU NEED
TO HAVE WITH YOUR PHYSICIAN.
IT SHOULDN'T JUST BE AN
ASSUMPTION THAT MORE THAN ONE
EMBRYO MEANS SUCCESS.
THERE ARE TECHNOLOGIES THAT
ALLOW FOR ONE EMBRYO AT A
TIME OVER SEVERAL CYCLES AND
SUCCESS IS JUST AS POSSIBLE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
INCENTIVE FOR A PHYSICIAN OR
CLINIC TO TRY TO IMPLANT MORE
THAN ONE EMBRYO AT A TIME?
>> DOCTORS AND CLINICS ARE
INCENTIVIZED IN THE WAY THAT THE
DATA IS GATHERED CURRENTLY BY
THE C.D.C TO TRANSFER MORE THAN
ONE EMBRYO AT A TIME BECAUSE
IT'S TRUE THAT USING MORE THAN
ONE EMBRYO AT A TIME INCREASES
YOUR CHANCES OF SUCCESS, BUT YOU
CAN RETRIEVE THOSE EGGS, DEVELOP
THEM INTO EMBRYOS AND THEN
FREEZE THOSE THAT YOU DON'T USE
THE FIRST TIME, AND HAVE SIMILAR
CHANCE OF SUCCESS, BUT ALSO
EXPERIENCE LESS POTENTIAL RISK
FOR THE MOTHER AND FOR THE BABY.
BECAUSE THERE'S LESS CHANCE OF
MULTIPLE GESTATION WHICH IS
AFFILIATED WITH A NUMBER OF
HEALTH AND MEDICAL ISSUES.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM THE
"REVEAL" WHICH IS IN THE CENTER
FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING,
BERNICE YEUNG, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IRAQI TROOPS
TODAY LAUNCHED WHAT THEY HOPE
WILL BE THEIR FINAL ASSAULT TO
RETAKE MOSUL, IRAQ'S SECOND
LARGEST CITY, FROM ISIS
MILITANTS.
WITH SUPPORT FROM U.S.
WARPLANES, IRAQI TANKS AND
SOLDIERS HAVE STORMED THE
DENSELY-POPULATED "OLD CITY"
SECTION OF MOSUL.
MORE THAN 100,000 CIVILIANS ARE
BELIEVED TO BE TRAPPED IN MOSUL,
WITH DWINDLING SUPPLIES.
ISIS HAS HELD THE CITY SINCE
2014.
THE ARMY'S CAMPAIGN BEGAN EIGHT
MONTHS AGO.
IN PORTUGAL, MORE THAN 1,000
FIREFIGHTERS AND SOLDIERS ARE
TRYING TO CONTAIN FAST-MOVING
FOREST FIRES THAT HAVE CLAIMED
AT LEAST 61 LIVES.
PORTUGAL'S PRIME MINISTER SAYS
THE TOLL IS EXPECTED TO RISE IN
WHAT HE CALLS "THE BIGGEST
TRAGEDY" THE COUNTRY HAS
EXPERIENCED IN DECADES.
A LIGHTNING STRIKE IS BELIEVED
TO HAVE IGNITED THE LARGEST FIRE
IN A MOUNTAINOUS REGION ABOUT
100 MILES NORTHEAST OF
PORTUGAL'S CAPITAL, LISBON.
MORE THAN HALF THE VICTIMS HAD
TRIED TO FLEE THE FLAMES AND
WERE FOUND TRAPPED INSIDE OR
NEAR THEIR CARS.
VOTERS IN FRANCE HAVE GIVEN
THEIR NEW PRESIDENT, EMMANUEL
MACRON, A BIG BOOST IN
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS.
PARTIAL OFFICIAL RESULTS SUGGEST
HIS CENTRIST "REPUBLIC ON THE
MOVE" PARTY WILL WIN AN
OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF SEATS
IN THE 577-SEAT NATIONAL
ASSEMBLY.
IT COULD END UP BEING THE
BIGGEST PARLIAMENTARY MAJORITY
IN ALMOST 50 YEARS.
MACRON'S DEFEATED RIVAL FOR
PRESIDENT-- FAR-RIGHT LEADER
MARINE LE PEN-- ALSO WON A SEAT.
THE ESTIMATED TURNOUT WAS THE
LOWEST IN DECADES AS VOTERS
WENT TO THE POLLS FOR THE THIRD
TIME IN SIX WEEKS IN THE SECOND
AND FINAL ROUND OF PARLIAMENTARY
ELECTIONS.
ALMOST A YEAR AFTER BRITAIN
VOTED IN A REFERENDUM TO LEAVE
THE EUROPEAN UNION, THE LONG-
AWAITED BREXIT NEGOTIATIONS
FINALLY BEGIN TOMORROW IN
BRUSSELS.
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER THERESA
MAY HAS SEEN HER POSITION
WEAKENED BY THE LOSS OF HER
CONSERVATIVE MAJORITY IN
PARLIAMENT IN LAST WEEK'S
ELECTION.
GERMANY'S FOREIGN MINISTER SAID
TODAY A SO-CALLED "SOFT" BREXIT,
IN WHICH BRITAIN STAYS IN THE
E.U. SINGLE TRADING MARKET MIGHT
BE POSSIBLE, IF BRITAIN WERE TO
ACCEPT THE FREE MOVEMENT OF
WORKERS ACROSS BORDERS AND OTHER
CONDITIONS.
BRITAIN IS SET TO LEAVE THE E.U.
IN MARCH OF 2019.
FINALLY, TWO DIFFERENT ATTACKS
IN SYRIA OF NOTE.
THE U.S. MILITARY SAYS AN
AMERICAN F-18 FIGHTER JET SHOT
DOWN A SYRIAN GOVERNMENT WAR
PLANE TODAY.
THIS AFTER THE U.S. SAYS THE
SYRIAN PLANE DROPPED BOMBS ON
U.S.-BACKED REBELS WEST OF
RAQQA.
IN A STATEMENT, THE U.S.
MILITARY SAID IT WILL NOT
HESITATE TO DEFEND ITS PARTNER
FORCES IN ITS MISSION TO DEFEAT
ISIS IN SYRIA AND IRAQ.
SEPARATELY, IRAN FIRED MISSILES
AT ISIS POSITIONS IN EASTERN
SYRIA IN RETALIATION THEY SAY
FOR THE TERRORIST ATTACKS IN
TEHRAN ON JUNE 7.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.